Let's talk through the authentication process in debug mode to better
understand Spring's OAuth server and OAuth2 support.
If we access the portfolio URL and hover over our new Login link,
you see it's for oauth2/authorization/crypto-portfolio.
If we click on it,
the OAuth2 authorization request redirect filter will intercept the request.
Retrieve all the client information we configured by
looking up the registration ID and the provider used by the
client with that registration ID.
It will then create a redirect URI and send a redirect
request to the client's browser.
If we inspect the network traffic in developer mode in our browser,
we can see the redirect request.
It's to the authorization endpoint on the authorization server,
auth/oauth, /authorize.
It's requesting the authorization code grants,
provides the client_id,
the request scope and state nonce to protect against cross-site request forgery,
and the redirect URI it wants the authorization
server to respond back with the code.
At the authorization server, let's put a breakpoint on the filter chain proxy.
You can see three filter chains are configured.
The first filter chain is intercepting requests to
the authorization server endpoints,
the token endpoint where the client can request the access token,
the token key endpoint that will return the public
keys used to sign the access token.
This is so the client can validate the tokens offline.
By default, it will be configured to deny all.
We would need to set up the keys and open it up in the
resource server config like we did for the other two
endpoints if we wanted to use that.
Then finally,
the check_token endpoint where the client can send an access token
and have it validated by the authorization server.
Now this filter chain also has a basic authentication
filter to authenticate the client.
If you recall, the client can send the client-id and secret.
Since this request is for the oauth/authorize,
it will be intercepted by the second filter chain.
If you recall, this is what we configured in the user config.
This chain authenticates the user, i.e.
the resource owner.
You can see it has a
UsernamePasswordAuthenticationFilter as we configured form
login.
The user will be prompted to log in.
Once they log in,
they will be prompted to consent the scopes requested by the client.
Only then will the request be allowed to proceed to the authorization endpoint,
which will validate the redirect URI against what we
configured and send the redirect request to the user's
browser with the code and state nonce.
You can see this redirect request here.
Our client path will intercept the request,
validate the state matches the one in the original sent to the auth server
to protect against cross-site request forgery and call the token endpoint
to exchange the code for the access token,
this time via our back channel directly to the authorization server
via a REST call and not via the user's browser.
The request will include the client-id, the client-secret,
and targeted at the oauth/token URI,
which will be intercepted this time by the first filter
chain on the authorization server.
Now you probably noticed the token endpoint is permitAll.
The actual authorization endpoint also authenticates the client-id and secret.
If everything checks out, it will return the access token to the client.
The client's user service will then use the access
token to call the userinfo endpoint.
This time the request will be intercepted by the third filter,
which is the resource server we configured.
It has an OAuth2AuthenticationProcessingFilter,
which will look out for the bearer token in the
header to authenticate the request.
Our web app will then use the attributes returned to
populate the authenticated principal.
We can now move all the authentication code out of the
client web app and into our auth server.
To the user, it will all look the same.
If we actually disable consent, they won't even notice.
But the client web app will no longer be handling passwords.
If we look at the current state, it's a lot better.
The authentication code is isolated from the application code.
This is ideal as security changes are performed less
frequently compared to application changes.
And that reduces the risk of user credentials and data being leaked.
Now further improvements that would need to be made is to move the Facebook
and Google authentication onto the authorization server.
That way our client app will only have to deal with one provider and reduces
the risk of the other provider's secrets being leaked.
It will also make adding additional providers transparent to our
internal applications and performed in one place.
You will also need to move user registration,
email verification, implement password policy rules,
security questions, two-factor authentication,
the management of your secrets like keys,
password hashing, to the authentication server.
Now we are going to leave it at that as building an
authorization server could be a course in itself.
If, however,
you're interested in adding these features to the authorization server,
my previous course covers a lot of this.
However, from my experience, it's simpler to just get an out-of-the-box solution.
There are many available, some even open source,
unless probably your organization already has one. We will look into one next.